How to structure a Flask app
=================

### This example app has the following structure

<pre>
flask-example
+-- Procfile (can be used to run locally and is used on Heroku)
+-- README.md
+-- appname (the actual application)
|       +-- __init__.py
|       +-- models.py
|       +-- server.py
+-- config.py
+-- manage.py (flask script commands)
+-- migrations (this app has a database)
|        +-- README
|        +-- alembic.ini
|        +-- env.py
|        +-- script.py.mako
|        +-- versions
|        |  +-- 32c89b1892d9_.py
+-- notforprod.db  (this is not in version control and is just a fallback db)
+-- requirements.txt (requirements for this project)
+-- run.sh (this just calls foreman start)
</pre>

### To get and play with the example code

**Prerequisites**

1. install [virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest)

2. install [virtualenvwrapper](http://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.org/en/latest/)

Note very important the part in virtualenvwrapper install intructions about sourcing the virtualenvwrapper.sh in your .bash_profile, .zshrc or whatever for the shell you use.

On my machine I have the following in my .zshrc

```
export WORKON_HOME=~/.virtualenvs
source /usr/local/bin/virtualenvwrapper.sh
```

So when I call ```mkvirtualenv some-name``` I get a some-name virtual environment directory in ~/.virtualenvs

Now create a virtualenv for the flask-example project

```
mkvirtualenv flask-examples
```

This automatically activates the virtualenv. Once done any pip installs will install into that virtualenv.

Anytime you want to activate the virtualenv from that point on, you just enter

```
workon flask-example
```

**Check the code out**

```
git clone git@github.com:LandRegistry/flask-examples.git
cd flask-examples
workon flask-examples
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Some suggestions/patterns contained in the example app

### A little bit of security

This is a starter for ten for things to add to all responses
```
@app.after_request
def after_request(response):
    response.headers.add('Content-Security-Policy', "default-src 'self'")
    response.headers.add('X-Frame-Options', 'deny')
    response.headers.add('X-Content-Type-Options', 'nosniff')
    response.headers.add('X-XSS-Protection', '1; mode=block')
    return response
```
Have a look at [List of useful HTTP headers](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/List_of_useful_HTTP_headers)

Any further suggestions welcome

### Use a package for the app

This allows you to initialise the application in the __init__.py  of the appname package.

### Configuration

Create a config.py with a base Config class  and a sub class per environment that  needs over riding of values, or additional values.

Values for configuration keys should be read from the environment. In other words set environment variables for local development and on any deployment target.

For example, for local development

```
export SETTINGS='config.Config'
```

or on Heroku:

Install [Heroku Toolbelt](https://toolbelt.heroku.com/) , then you can set the config to be used as follows.

```
heroku config:set SETTINGS=config.HerokuConfig
```


### To run the application

The app should have a procfile Procfile which in this app looks like this:

```
web: gunicorn -k eventlet appname.server:app
```

There may be a higher level script to run a number of services. In that case create a run.sh and add that to project run_all.sh

### Databases

If the app connects to a database then we'll need a means to create and manage db schemas. The suggested approach would be to add Flask-Migrate and Flask-Script to the project requirements.txt.

Flask-Migrate will pull in Flask-SQLAlchemy and Alembic (which manages the actual migration). Flask-Script provides a nice wrapper for constructing commands.

This example project has a simple model in models.py that will be the basis of generated migration files.  Have a look at manage.py as well which imports the models and is configured to use the migration commands. Note because you need to export a SETTINGS value, the commands can be run against different databases dependent on environment.

On first installation (a one time operation), you would run

```
python manage.py db init
```

This creates a migration directory with files needed for Alembic

You can then run

```
python manage.py db migrate
```

That will dump a file into the versions directory in migrations. Remember, that in manage.py script there's an import for all the models in models.py. That's how the tool knows what models to create DDL for.

The file created in versions contains the python code needed to create tables based upon your models.

Below is a snippet from the example migration script in project.

```
def upgrade():
    ### commands auto generated by Alembic - please adjust! ###
    op.create_table('foo',
    sa.Column('id', sa.Integer(), nullable=False),
    sa.Column('fooname', sa.String(length=140), nullable=True),
    sa.PrimaryKeyConstraint('id'),
    sa.UniqueConstraint('fooname')
    )
```

To apply the change to your local db (be that sqlite or postgres or whatever you've configured in the Config class you have set your SETTINGS environment variable) then run.

```
python manage.py db upgrade
```

To run the migration on heroku you just need to have set the correct configuration class using heroku config:set as mentioned above. Push the repo to Heroku
and then use:

```
heroku run ...
```

to run the commands as above.


### Frontend and static assets

**TODO - Update when front end spike done please**

Add GOV UK frontend toolkit as a git submodule.

If there is a front end to the application add static and templates directories.

```
git submodule add https://github.com/alphagov/govuk_frontend_toolkit.git ./static/govuk_toolkit
```


